Kappa/d5 (#16436)
supabase/supabase: apps/www/_blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million.mdx

<div>
  <img
    alt="cpu load vertical scaling light"
    className="dark:hidden"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/cpu-vertical-light.png"
  />
  <img
    alt="cpu load vertical scaling dark"
    className="hidden dark:block"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/cpu-vertical-dark.png"
  />
</div>

The load is spread evenly between all cores, which is great. CPU usage is high, signaling that the current setup has reached its capacity: a single Supavisor instance with 64 core handles around 500,000 connections. With this reference number, we moved on to horizontal scaling tests.

### Scaling to 1,000,000 connections

To examine horizontal scalability, we deployed two 64-core Supavisor instances, with the first instance connected directly to the database and the other relaying queries through the first.

<div>
  <img
    alt="diagram supavisor 2 instances light"
    className="dark:hidden"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/diagram-1m-light.png"
  />
  <img
    alt="diagram supavisor 2 instances dark"
    className="hidden dark:block"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/diagram-1m-dark.png"
  />
</div>

> In the Supavisor architecture, only a single node holds direct connections to each database instance. When you add Postgres more databases or read-replicas, Supavisor spreads the connections to the replicas. Every Supavisor instance can accept incoming connections and either execute queries themselves (if they directly connected) or relay to another node (if not).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Supavisor architecture, only a single node holds direct connections to each database instance. When you add more Postgres databases or read-replicas, Supavisor spreads the connections to the replicas. Every Supavisor instance can accept incoming connections and either execute queries themselves (if they directly connected) or relay to another node (if not).
```

launchweek: 8
tags:
  - launch-week
  - supavisor
  - postgres
date: '2023-08-11'
published_at: '2023-08-11T09:00:00.000-07:00'
toc_depth: 3
author: egor_romanov,chasers,stas
image: launch-week-8/day-4/vercel-and-supabase-og.jpg
thumb: launch-week-8/day-4/vercel-and-supabase-thumb.jpg
---

One of the most [widely-discussed shortcomings](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=24735012) of Postgres is it's connection system. Every Postgres connection has a reasonably high memory footprint, and determining the maximum number of connections your database can handle is a [bit of an art](https://momjian.us/main/blogs/pgblog/2020.html#April_22_2020).

A common solution is [connection pooling](https://supabase.com/docs/guides/database/connecting-to-postgres#how-connection-pooling-works). Supabase currently offers [pgbouncer](http://www.pgbouncer.org/) which is single-threaded, making it difficult to scale. We've seen some [novel ways](https://twitter.com/viggy28/status/1677674197664038912?s=12&t=_WCn3v_QJ7tkQLvOvkZkqg) to scale pgbouncer, but we have a [few other goals](https://github.com/supabase/supavisor#motivation) in mind for our platform.

> And so we've built [Supavisor](https://github.com/supabase/supavisor), a Postgres connection pooler that can handle millions of connections. You can use Supavisor to connect to your Postgres from servers and Edge Functions without worrying about connection limits.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And so we've built [Supavisor](https://github.com/supabase/supavisor), a Postgres connection pooler that can handle millions of connections. 
```

## What is Supavisor?

> Supavisor is a scalable, cloud-native Postgres connection pooler. It can handle millions of connections without significant overhead or latency. It has been developed with multitenancy in mind and can be used with multiple databases. Supavisor is built in Elixir, in partnership with [José Valim](https://twitter.com/josevalim) (the creator of Elixir) and the [Dashbit](https://dashbit.co/) team.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Supavisor is a scalable, cloud-native Postgres connection pooler. It has been developed with multi-tenancy in mind, handling millions of connections without significant overhead or latency. Supavisor is built in Elixir, in partnership with [José Valim](https://twitter.com/josevalim) (the creator of Elixir) and the [Dashbit](https://dashbit.co/) team.
```

<div>
  <img
    alt="multi database"
    className="dark:hidden"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/diagram-light.png"
  />
  <img
    alt="multi database"
    className="hidden dark:block"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/diagram-dark.png"
  />
</div>

> Supavisor will enable us to build some exciting new features:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Supavisor will enable us to build some exciting new features for your Postgres cluster:
```

- query caching
- automatic read-replica load balancing
- query blocking
- and much more

## Benchmarking 1 million connections

> Before rolling out Supavisor to our entire Postgres fleet, we wanted to benchmark the characteristics it exhibited under load. We tested how we can scale the cluster to handle workloads both vertically and horizontally on demand. These results have given us confidence that Supavisor can meet the needs of the Supabase platform.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We've benchmarked the characteristics Supavisor exhibits under load before rolling it out to our entire Postgres fleet. We tested how we can scale the cluster vertically and horizontally. These results have given us confidence that Supavisor is ready.
```

### Setup

We use a [custom load-testing application](https://github.com/supabase/benchmarks) to test the features of the Supabase platform. It consists of:

> - Terraform scripts for creating a testing environment on AWS.
> - k6 as the load generator. We used the k6 guides for [running large-scale tests](https://k6.io/docs/testing-guides/running-large-tests/) and [fine-tuning OS](https://k6.io/docs/misc/fine-tuning-os/) to tweak the config for AWS instances.
> - Grafana + Prometheus for monitoring.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Terraform scripts for creating a testing environment on AWS.
2. k6 as the load generator. We used the k6 guides for [running large-scale tests](https://k6.io/docs/testing-guides/running-large-tests/) and [fine-tuning OS](https://k6.io/docs/misc/fine-tuning-os/) to tweak the config for AWS instances.
3. Grafana + Prometheus for monitoring.
```

> To simulate 1,000,000 concurrent active connections, we used 20 AWS EC2 instances with 16 cores and 32GB of RAM. We ran the tests for up to 2 hours to ensure that the Supavisor could handle the load over long periods.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To simulate 1,000,000 concurrent active connections, we used 20 AWS EC2 instances with 16 cores and 32GB of RAM. We ran the tests for up to 2 hours to ensure that the Supavisor can handle load over long periods.
```

### Establishing a baseline

In the first test, we set up a single ARM 16-core Supavisor instance on Ubuntu 22.04.2 aarch64 connected to one database instance.

We wanted to assess the capacity of a single Supavisor instance. We achieved:

- 250,000 concurrent connections to Supavisor
- Supavisor was running with a pool of 400 direct connections to the database
- The system was processing 20,000 queries per second (QPS)

<div>
  <img
    alt="diagram supavisor 1 instance light"
    className="dark:hidden"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/diagram-baseline-light.png"
  />
  <img
    alt="diagram supavisor 1 instance dark"
    className="hidden dark:block"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/diagram-baseline-dark.png"
  />
</div>

> At this point, the database was the bottleneck - 20,000 QPS was the maximum this instance could handle. Increasing QPS is possible with a larger instance or read-replicas, but wanted to focus on the scalability of Supavisor's connection limit. As Supavisor is multitenant and built with Elixir, scaling up is as easy as adding a new tenant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, the database was the bottleneck - 20,000 QPS was the maximum this instance could handle. Increasing QPS is possible with a larger instance or read-replicas, but we wanted to focus on the scalability of Supavisor's connection limit. As Supavisor is multitenant and built with Elixir, scaling up is as easy as adding a new tenant.
```

> At this point, the database was the bottleneck - 20,000 QPS was the maximum this instance could handle. Increasing QPS is possible with a larger instance or read-replicas, but wanted to focus on the scalability of Supavisor's connection limit. As Supavisor is multitenant and built with Elixir, scaling up is as easy as adding a new tenant.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this setup the database is the bottleneck - 20,000 QPS was the maximum this instance could handle. Increasing QPS would have been possible with a larger instance or read-replicas, but wanted to focus on the scalability of Supavisor's connection limit (not Postgres's). Since Supavisor is built with Elixir, scaling is as easy as adding a new tenant.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this setup the database is the bottleneck - 20,000 QPS was the maximum this instance could handle. Increasing QPS would have been possible with a larger instance or read-replicas, but we wanted to focus on the scalability of Supavisor's connection limit (not Postgres's). Since Supavisor is built with multitenancy, addition of read-replicas is as easy as sending a single post request.
```

<div>
  <img
    alt="diagram supavisor 1 instance with more cpu light"
    className="dark:hidden"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/diagram-vertical-light.png"
  />
  <img
    alt="diagram supavisor 1 instance with more cpu dark"
    className="hidden dark:block"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/diagram-vertical-dark.png"
  />
</div>

The system showed no signs of instability or performance degradation. QPS remained constant at 20,000, proving that an increased number of connections doesn't negatively affect Supavisor's overall performance (this is generally expected from a [BEAM-based language](https://stressgrid.com/blog/webserver_benchmark/) like Elixir).

<div>
  <img
    alt="chart connections vertical scaling light"
    className="dark:hidden"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/chart-vertical-light.png"
  />
  <img
    alt="chart connections vertical scaling dark"
    className="hidden dark:block"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/chart-vertical-dark.png"
  />
</div>

> While running this scenario, we also monitored how the load was distributed over Supavisor instance's cores:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We also monitored how the load was distributed over Supavisor instance's cores:
```

<div>
  <img
    alt="cpu load vertical scaling light"
    className="dark:hidden"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/cpu-vertical-light.png"
  />
  <img
    alt="cpu load vertical scaling dark"
    className="hidden dark:block"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/cpu-vertical-dark.png"
  />
</div>

> The load is evenly spread between all cores, which is great. CPU usage is high, signaling that it is around the maximum possible for the current setup. A single instance of Supavisor with 64 cores could handle about 500,000 connections with little capacity left for emergency cases. With this reference number, we moved on to horizontal scaling tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The load is spread evenly between all cores, which is great. CPU usage is high, signaling that the current setup has reached its capacity: a single Supavisor instance with 64 core handles around 500,000 connections. With this reference number, we moved on to horizontal scaling tests.
```

### Scaling to 1,000,000 connections

To examine horizontal scalability, we deployed two 64-core Supavisor instances, with the first instance connected directly to the database and the other relaying queries through the first.

<div>
  <img
    alt="diagram supavisor 2 instances light"
    className="dark:hidden"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/diagram-1m-light.png"
  />
  <img
    alt="diagram supavisor 2 instances dark"
    className="hidden dark:block"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/diagram-1m-dark.png"
  />
</div>

> In the Supavisor architecture, only single node holds direct connections to each database instance. If you add Postgres read-replicas, or another databases, then the Supavisor cluster will spread the connections to the replicas. Every Supavisor instance can accept incoming connections and either execute queries themselves (if they directly connected) or relay to another node (if not).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the Supavisor architecture, only single node holds direct connections to each database instance. If you add Postgres read-replicas, or another databases, then the Supavisor cluster will spread the connections to the replicas. Every Supavisor instance can accept incoming connections and either execute queries themselves (if they directly connected) or relay to another node (if not).
```

This setup successfully handled:

> - **1,003,200 simultaneous connections** to the Supavisor instances.
> - **20,000 QPS** or **1.2 million queries per minute.** Each user connected executed `select` queries once every 50 seconds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **1,003,200 simultaneous connections** to the Supavisor instances.
- **20,000 QPS** or **1.2 million queries per minute.** Each connection executed a `select` query once every 50 seconds.
```

- The relaying instance was extremely over-resourced. Most cores had little-to-no workload because relayed connections are more lightweight.

<div>
  <img
    alt="cpu load 1 million light"
    className="dark:hidden"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/cpu-1m-light.png"
  />
  <img
    alt="cpu load 1 million dark"
    className="hidden dark:block"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/cpu-1m-dark.png"
  />
</div>

In a multitenant setup (or when using Read-Replicas), the load is much more evenly spread because all Supavisor instances connect to comparable numbers of databases and have both direct and relayed connections evenly distributed between each other.

<div>
  <img
    alt="diagram supavisor 2 instances with more databases light"
    className="dark:hidden"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/diagram-2db-light.png"
  />
  <img
    alt="diagram supavisor 2 instances with more databases dark"
    className="hidden dark:block"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/diagram-2db-dark.png"
  />
</div>

> ### Supavisor's impact on query duration

Reviewer 2: Is this the same as latency? Why do we call it "query duration" here?

Reviewer: i removed latency to not mislead, i hope it would help to understand that this is whole round trip time

> To measure the impact, we started with 5,000 QPS (queries per second). This allows us to exclude side effects from the database side (long query execution times).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To measure the impact on query duration, we started with 5,000 queries per second. This allows us to exclude side effects from the database side (long query execution times).
```

The query used in the experiment was the following:

```sql
select *
from (
    values
    (1, 'one'),
    (2, 'two'),
    (3, 'three')
) as t (num, letter);
```

> We found with Supavisor median query duration was less than 2ms. And this includes not only time from client to Supavisor but the whole roundtrip: from Client to Supavisor ➡️ from Supavisor to Postgres ➡️ then query execution time on Postgres ➡️ and back to Supavisor ➡️ and to the Client.

Reviewer 2: I just don't know how this is possible?

> from Client to Supavisor

Even this would take longer than 2ms? Was the execution happening on the same server?

Reviewer: Same aws region

Reviewer: We tried ping from supavisor to db instance and it shows submiliisecond timings, just networking should be around 1ms for the whole roundtrip

Reviewer 3: Maybe "client" is confusing because people associate "client" with "browser"?

Reviewer: ok to me, client is just client, do you have smth on your mind that would fit better?

| ------ | -------------- |
| Median | 2ms            |
| p95    | 3ms            |
| p99    | 23ms           |

<div>
  <img
    alt="chart query duration for 5k qps light"
    className="dark:hidden"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/chart-5k-duration-light.png"
  />
  <img
    alt="chart query duration for 5k qps dark"
    className="hidden dark:block"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/chart-5k-duration-dark.png"
  />
</div>

<div>
  <img
    alt="chart query per second for 5k qps light"
    className="dark:hidden"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/chart-5k-rps-light.png"
  />
  <img
    alt="chart query per second for 5k qps dark"
    className="hidden dark:block"
    src="/images/blog/2023-08-11-supavisor-1-million/chart-5k-rps-dark.png"
  />
</div>

We can see that 95% of queries were completed in less than 3 milliseconds. A slightly higher query duration at the beginning of the test can be explained by the dynamic nature of Supavisor-to-Database connection pool. It is being scaled up to the hard limit when more clients establish connections to Supavisor itself and scaled back down when users leave.

> But if you are curious about the scenario with 20,000QPS, we measured a median of 18.4ms:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We continued to scale up to 20,000QPS to assess the impact on latency and measured a median of 18.4ms:
```

You'll be able to use both PgBouncer and Supavisor for a few months in parallel. Nothing will change with your PgBouncer setup if you need to switch back.

Supavisor will be added to the self-hosted stack as soon as we have tested it across our database fleet. That said - we're confident that it's ready for use if you want to try it with your own Postgres database. [Sequin](https://sequin.io/), one of our partners, has been using Supavisor for several months:

<div className="bg-gray-300 rounded-lg px-6 py-2 italic">

With Supavisor, we've been able to ship incredible features that would have been very hard to build otherwise. For example, our customers can now read from and write to Salesforce and HubSpot via Postgres. We achieve this by intercepting queries that route through Supavisor.

We chose Supavisor because it's scalable, multi-tenant, and written in Elixir. We were able to integrate it easily with our own Elixir infrastructure. As partners, we look forward to helping shape the future of Postgres connection pooling with Supabase.

— Anthony Accomazzo - Co-founder of Sequin

> </div>

Reviewer 2: We actually have a "Quote" component that we can use here - see it in this blog post:

https://supabase.com/blog/supabase-series-a#about-the-round

## Conclusion

Supavisor's vertical and horizontal scaling ability make it the optimal solution for developers who aim to create applications that can effortlessly scale, even under extreme workloads, avoiding issues such as "too many connections" and enabling the full power of edge functions and serverless.

> If you are interested in exploring Supavisor's potential or want to implement its scalability in your upcoming project, check out the GitHub repository to try it out. Or, if you are using the Supabase platform, [contact support](https://app.supabase.com/support/new) to start using it today, and we'll provide you with the connection details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are interested in exploring Supavisor's potential or want to implement its scalability in your upcoming project, check out [the GitHub repository](https://github.com/supabase/supavisor) to try it out. Or, if you are using the Supabase platform, [contact support](https://app.supabase.com/support/new) to start using it today, and we'll provide you with the connection details.
```

> If you are interested in exploring Supavisor's potential or want to implement its scalability in your upcoming project, check out the GitHub repository to try it out. Or, if you are using the Supabase platform, [contact support](https://app.supabase.com/support/new) to start using it today, and we'll provide you with the connection details.

Reviewer 2: we've already said this in the section above. Can we say it once only?
